

When people decide to move to or from a city, it’s usually of their own free will. The rise and fall of urban populations is dependent on millions of decisions that people make about their lives every day, and these are often related to longer-term policy decisions, economic climates, and political trends.

Physicists in Spain have created a model for predicting how any given cities’ population will change based on knowledge of the city’s past and current state, as well as data about population trends in neighboring cities.

“We found that cities have memory, in the demographic sense. We can measure the characteristic time of this memory. For the Spanish city, it’s 15 years,” wrote quantum physicist Alberto Hernando de Castro, the lead author of a new study published in the Journal of the Royal Society Interface.

While studying a century dataset of Spanish cities he discovered two underlying heuristics. Cities have inertia: A city’s future growth depends heavily on its past — particularly the last 15 years. Looking back 30 years wouldn’t help improve a prediction, and 10 years was probably not enough. He also found that cities can become “entangled” with each other; particularly those within 50 miles play a big role in predicting a given city’s fate.

The physics in Barcelona should be the same as the physics in Austin, though Austin is a forerunner of a more general trend that The World Health Organization estimates that 70 percent of the global population will live in cities and towns by 2050, up from just over 50 percent today; crossed the line in 2008.  Being able to predict said utility and infrastructure requirements in advance will aid in planning everywhere urbanizing.

The case of Barcelona was typical of the trends Hernando, a researcher at Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, found over the last 50 years as Spanish residents moved from villages to cities. He could model how cities close to Barcelona, even if they started small, grew in tandem with the urban hub and developed a full “multi-core metropolitan area.” “It can sound obvious to some people, but what we have learned is how to measure and quantify these phenomena. If we can analyze it quantitatively, it means that in a near future we can accurately simulate it, and predict the complex outcome that a migration of this kind can generate in the future,” he says.

The work began when Hernando investigated patterns he noticed in Spain’s 2008 electoral results. He saw that when correlated to the population of a city, he could predict the electoral results for each party based on the same physical models he used in his own work. Like dust floating in the air, each individual decision was like a randomly moving particle, but when millions of decisions were viewed as one, he got something like Newton’s laws of motion: a predictable equation about how a system should behave – about where the dust would settle.

Hernando then investigated whether he could describe the physics of urban migration more exactly, and found the perfect dataset to do it. Since 1900, the Spanish National Statistics Institute had been collecting data about the population of 8,100 municipalities in Spain, including a total of 45 million people. It is one of the longest-running and most comprehensive collections of urban populations in the world. For the last three decades, Spain had collected population every year, rather than every 10 years, as in the United States.

Hernando plans to add information about cities, such as the health of companies in a region, that predict economic trends in addition to population trends. He also needs to expand the model to other cities – the 15 years of “memory” might be 25 years in the U.S., for example. But he believes his basic model is universal: “The physics laws are the same everywhere,” he says. “The physics here in Barcelona should be the same as the physics in New York City.”

Right now, he’s tracking Detroit’s decline, which is tied to both global and local forces in the last few decades. He is looking for other cities that show very similar population signatures in how they interact with the larger system of demographic trends: “Those cities that we find highly correlated with Detroit, will they have the same fate? We don’t know at this moment, but we hope that the development of virtual simulations will help us to understand how a system of cities behave in advance.”

Some forecasts explore different future scenarios of GDP, rent, wages, demographics, policy, and investment.  Others match probabilistic estimates of growth to spatially explicit grid-based models, which use features of topography, population density, and existing infrastructure as primary drivers of land change. Many forecasts rely on satellite measurements of current urban coverage, which facilitates aggregation of data across cities.

Past recent growth, the presence of immigrants, the fraction of population older than 25 and younger than 65, low taxes, and good weather are all positively associated with population growth. If an area is growing, it’s usually because something good is happening. There are jobs, cost of living is low, the climate is nice, there’s a university, etc. These factors don’t tend to move wildly about each year; they’re pretty stable. The factors that determine where people want to live do not usually experience extreme year-over-year variation for most places. Indeed, many factors determining population growth can be extremely durable: presence of universities, presence of government centers, access to transportation networks, broad industry clusters, etc. These can be stable for decades.